---
layout: post
title: Using JointJS
category: programming
tags: [ruby-on-rails, javascript, story-vine, jointjs]
---

<!-- more -->

One of the trickest features to implement in our final project was the vine ([example](http://story-vine-app.herokuapp.com/snippets/18/vine)). The team and I were deciding between D3.js and JointJS, but we ultimately decided to use [JointJS](http://www.jointjs.com/) since it was 1) easier on the eyes and 2) was easier to learn.

Let me walk you through the process of getting JointJS to work with our data.

### MODEL

This is in the Snippet model.

{% highlight ruby %}
  def children
    self.stories.where(parent_id: nil)
  end

  def as_json(options={})
    { id: id,
      type: "snippets",
      published: true,
      content: content,
      children: self.children }
  end
{% endhighlight %}

Here I created a method [as_json](http://apidock.com/rails/ActiveModel/Serializers/JSON/as_json) which returns a hash representing the model. I also have a children method so that the snippet can access its' "children" (stories).

### CONTROLLER

This is within the Snippets controller.

{% highlight ruby %}
def vine
  @snippet = Snippet.find(params[:id])
  render layout: false
end
{% endhighlight %}

I created a route for the vine and rendered the layout as false. Initally when the default layout was being rendered, I noticed that there was a lot of conflict with the JointJS library and other JS libraries we were using. So by rendering the layout as false, this page specifically would not inherit any of the JS libraries in the application layout and I could specify which scripts I wanted to include in the head tags.

### VIEW (vine.html.erb)

In the head tags, I included this:

{% highlight ruby %}
<%= javascript_tag do %>
  window.rootJSON = <%= raw @snippet.to_json(include: :children) %>
<% end %>
{% endhighlight %}

This would call set @snippet's information (as configured in the as_json method) equal to the window's rootJSON property. By saving the information to a property of the window object, I'll be able to grab it and manipulate it on the page using JavaScript.

I am also using :include: to include associations, specifically for the stories. (A story belongs to a parent (parent story) and has many children).

### JOINTJS

{% highlight js %}
  var vineGraph = document.getElementById('vine-graph');
  // Checks to see if HTML element is on the page.
  if(vineGraph){

    var vineData = rootJSON;
    // Sets vineData equal to the JSON data in the window.

    var vineDataKeys = Object.keys(vineData).sort(function(a, b) {return a - b;});
    // Sorts the keys of the data.

    var graph = new joint.dia.Graph;
    // Creates a new jointJS graph

    var paper = new joint.dia.Paper({
      el: $('#vine-graph'),
      width: "100%",
      height: "100%",
      model: graph,
      gridSize: 1
    });
    // The jointJS paper grabs the #vine-graph div on the page and sets it's size.

    paper.fitToContent({
      padding: '40',
      allowNewOrigin: 'any'
    });

    var cells = [];
    var nodes = {};

    joint.shapes.custom = {};
    joint.shapes.custom.ElementLabelLink = joint.shapes.basic.Rect.extend({
    markup: '<g class="rotatable"><g class="scalable"><rect/></g><a><text/></a></g>',
    // Note the `<a>` SVG element surrounding the rest of the markup.

    defaults: joint.util.deepSupplement({
      type: 'custom.ElementLabelLink'
    }, joint.shapes.basic.Rect.prototype.defaults)
  });

    function strip(html) {
      // Function to remove HTML tags
       var tmp = document.createElement("DIV");
       tmp.innerHTML = html;
       return tmp.textContent || tmp.innerText || "";
    }

    function flowTree(root) {
      // In our case, the root will be the snippet

      var queue = [root];
      // Puts the root into an array called queue

      root.depth = 0;
      // Sets the root's depth to 0

      var layers = [];
      var all = [];
      // Initialize empty arrays

      while (queue.length > 0) {
        var node = queue.shift();
        // Removes the first element from queue and set it equal to node

        all.push(node);
        // Push the node to the all array

        for(var i = 0; i < node.children.length; i++){
          node.children[i].depth = node.depth + 1;
          // Sets the value of the child's depth to the parent's depth + 1
          // This will make sure to pull all siblings on the same line (or have the same depth)

          queue.push(node.children[i]);
          // Pushes the child to the queue array

        }
        layers[node.depth] = layers[node.depth] || 0;
        // At index of node.depth, set the value equal to itself or 0

        node.pos = {
          x: 200 * layers[node.depth]++,
          // Set x position to 200 times the value of layers[node.depth] and then increase the value in the array by 1 AFTER the x position is set
          // By increasing the value at that index, the next sibling will be further down the x axis

          y: 200 * node.depth
          // Set y position to 200 * node.depth
        };
      }
      var longestLayer = Math.max.apply(null, layers);
      // Finds which layer is the longer, or has the most siblings

      var midpoint = 200 * (longestLayer / 2);
      // Sets midpoint to 200 times half of the longest layer

      var i = all.length;
      while (--i >= 0) {
        // Decrements from i

        var node = all[i];
        // Sets node to the node at all[i]

        var width = layers[node.depth] * 200;
        // Width is equal to the value at layers[node.depth] and multiplies it by 200

        node.pos.x += midpoint - width / 2;
        // This will center all the nodes along the x axis

      }
    }


    function makeTree(node, tree) {
      if(node.published){
        // Checks to make sure that the snippet/story is published.

        var box = new joint.shapes.custom.ElementLabelLink({
          position: node.pos,
          size: {width: 150, height: 90},
          attrs: {
            rect: { fill: '#000000', rx: 5, ry: 5, 'stroke-width': 2, stroke: '#65b6b0' },
            a: { 'xlink:href': '/' + node.type + '/' + node.id , cursor: 'pointer' },
            text: { text: joint.util.breakText(node.title || strip(node.content).substr(0, 20), { width: 135 }) }
          }
          // a is the link to the story/snippet show page
          // the text is the node's title or content. if it's the content, we use the strip function to remove the html tags.

        });
        box.attr({
          rect: { fill: '#97cfcc', rx: 20, ry: 20 },
          text: { fill: 'white', 'font-size': 15 },
          '.myrect2': { fill: 'red' },
        })
        // attrs are styling attributes found in the documentation

        tree.push(box);
        // Pushes the box into the tree

      }
      for(var i = 0; i < node.children.length; i++){
        if(node.children[i].published){
          // Checks to see if the node has published children

        var child = makeTree(node.children[i], tree);
        // Calls makeTree() on the child

        var link = new joint.dia.Link({
          source: {id: box.id},
          target: {id: child.id},
          smooth: true
        });

        link.attr({
          '.connection': { stroke: '#65b6b0', 'stroke-width': 2 },
          '.marker-source': { stroke: '#65b6b0', fill: '#65b6b0', d: 'M 10 0 L 0 5 L 10 10 z' },
          '.marker-target': { stroke: '#F39C12', fill: '#F39C12', d: 'M14.615,4.928c0.487-0.986,1.284-0.986,1.771,0l2.249,4.554c0.486,0.986,1.775,1.923,2.864,2.081l5.024,0.73c1.089,0.158,1.335,0.916,0.547,1.684l-3.636,3.544c-0.788,0.769-1.28,2.283-1.095,3.368l0.859,5.004c0.186,1.085-0.459,1.553-1.433,1.041l-4.495-2.363c-0.974-0.512-2.567-0.512-3.541,0l-4.495,2.363c-0.974,0.512-1.618,0.044-1.432-1.041l0.858-5.004c0.186-1.085-0.307-2.6-1.094-3.368L3.93,13.977c-0.788-0.768-0.542-1.525,0.547-1.684l5.026-0.73c1.088-0.158,2.377-1.095,2.864-2.081L14.615,4.928z' }
        });
        // attrs are styling attributes found in the documentation

        tree.push(link);
        // Pushes the link itno the tree

      }
    }
      return box;
    }

    flowTree(vineData);
    makeTree(vineData, cells);

    graph.addCells(cells);
    // Adds all the cells to the graph
  }
{% endhighlight %}